  My project, Predestined Words, is centered around the conflict between human ingenuity and the power of algorithms over it, which is revealed during an interactive process of creative writing. Viewers are asked to write about whatever is their heart’s desire in a minimal text interface; however, as they write, the “system” interjects itself – changing, deleting, and substituting phrases with predetermined words selected by the "algorithm." The process of creating becomes one that can be shaped by the system, giving rise to a contemplation about the loss of freedom in our era of digital technologies.
  The artistic value of the work resides in its ability to convey criticism through user interaction. Unlike traditional art forms in which an idea is expressed in a two-dimensional way, here the concept is embodied and becomes visible when the viewer interacts with the piece.
  The project relates to contemporary issues related to the digital aspect of our existence. Namely, it is focused on the fact that algorithms constantly modify, select, and arrange the phrases we are typing into the computer in an effort to optimize the human experience. Consider autocorrect, prediction features of keyboards, and other advanced AI tools.
 This project highlights the problem of the constant intrusion of algorithms into our communication, allowing human expression and autonomy decay in the process. In shifting the perspective from that which is considered mundane and, instead, displaying realities unmasked, this piece urges viewers to reflect in question considering the amount of digital words that truly are their own.
To conclude, while generated words are not as new and unheard as they once were, Predestined Words is unique through its focus on the overall technological interference compared to assistance. The piece, instead of aiding users in producing “better” writing, offers a critique over whether assistance and optimization should be considered beneficial at all, holding control and autonomy as the focal point of the critique.
